All right I want to now talk a little bit about Electromotive forces the short terms.
People use the three letters ESF to describe this.
So let's consider this simple circuit I have over here which forms a closed loop.
So I have this green box here represents just the battery of the label the two terminals of the battery
here is the one positive one negative.
Could be like a 9 volt battery for example.
And now well we know what's going to happen that this battery here will produce an electric field in
the wire.
So if you look at the electric field on this section it would be in that direction if you look at the
electric field over here it's in this direction and the electric field over here is in that direction
other things we discuss the direction of the current the direction of the current should be in the direction
of our electric field.
And again here we're talking about the positive electric current and the positive electric current was
actually in the opposite direction of the flow of electrons.
All right if you're an electron over here and this section of the wire.
Well again I don't want to go anywhere near this negative terminal because I'm also charged negatively.
So I'm actually going to move in that direction.
All right.
So an electron
actually flows in the opposite direction of the positive current.
But that's kind of the same thing right.
Negative charges flowing in one direction are the equivalent to having a positive current in the opposite
direction.
MacDraw one more electron here and again that would go in that direction.
Now that's all fine and dandy but let's look at what happens inside this battery.
So what is the direction of the electric field produced by the battery here inside.
Well again if it goes from positive to negative inside the wire it also has to go from positive to negative
inside the battery.
OK.
However look what happens if you're an electron over here.
So you've kind of done the complete loop and then you get over here.
Well you're actually quite happy to remain near this positive terminal right why would you want to go
to the negative terminal.
You're not going to do that by yourself.
OK.
It's kind of the same thing as the water fountain picture I had on the previous slide.
Right once the water gets to the bottom water is quite happy to remain down there at the bottom pool.
However there is a pump that actually brings the water back up and that is because something is doing
work an external agent is doing work in order to bring that water bring those water droplets back to
the top.
It's doing work because there is the force of gravity acting down imagine here if we take this let me
draw a simple water fountain over here.
It won't be as decorative as the other one but let's draw water droplets.
Now we know there's a force of gravity acting on that water droplets.
So as it's going up there is a force of gravity acting down so there has to be a force that opposes
that right.
Some applied force in order to bring it back and that's the force due to the pump.
Then once it gets to the top you've basically done work against the force of gravity or against gravity
in order to get it there you've changed the potential energy of the water droplet.
So it's kind of analogous to what's going to happen inside this battery although the electron is quite
happy to remain here.
There is going to be a force.
It's not the force produced by this electric field there is a force acting on that charge that force
as that electron moves.
There is an electric force acting on it which is opposite of the electric field.
This is the force produced by that electric field.
So there has to be another force acting on this electron in order to move it on the other side.
Let's just call that f and now this origin of this force here comes from the chemical reaction inside
that battery could be some diffusion process.
But basically there is a force that ends up being either at least the same size or a little bit bigger.
That does work on this electron against this electric field to bring it to the negative terminal.
All the details of this are really not that important for our our class over here but I just want to
kind of describe the process a little bit that the battery.
What it does is it does work for every single charge for every single electron it has to do work in
order to bring it to the negative terminal.
It's analogous to the water pump.
The pump has to do work on every single water droplet in order bring it to the top and then gravity
will do work to bring it back down.
The amount of work done is related to the potential difference between both of those terminals.
If the potential differences let's call this side here terminal a let's call this terminal B the potential
differences V.A mine is VB.
And this is what they call the electromotive force and we give it the letter e like this.
OK.
This comes in units of volts and a volt if you recall is a jewel Procul on joules are units of energy
or units of work.
So this is the amount of work done per unit charge.
Now if you want to know how much current you get now now you can apply Ohm's law because the voltage
difference now is given by this DMF of the battery.
And this here must be equal to the current multiplied by the resistance and the resistance would be
the resistance of this wire it could also include.
There's also some internal resistance to that battery but let's just include the resistance of the wire
for now.
So you'd be able to solve this and obtain how much current Do I get for this value of MF.